# fix!: change all_* and any_* to take *apps instead of a list (#116)

**Repository**: jubilant
**Commit**: [70a7f016](https://github.com/canonical/jubilant/commit/70a7f016192d2209bab95e0550553754f41dfa7e)
**Date**: 2025-04-24T14:37:19+12:00

## Classification

| Field | Value |
|-------|-------|
| Bug Area | status-checking |
| Bug Type | api-contract |
| Severity | medium |
| Fix Category | source-fix |

## Summary

Breaking API change: all_active/any_error etc. changed from list parameter to *args for better ergonomics

## Commit Message

This is a breaking change to the signature of the `all_*` and `any_*`
functions, per discussion at #114: it changes the usage when apps are
specified from `all_active(status, ['app1', 'app2'])` to
`all_active(status, 'app1', 'app2')` to simplify and provide better
ergonomics.

The PR also adds various examples of `juju.wait` with both the
direct-callable and lambda usage to make it clearer how you can use
these helpers.

Fixes #114.

## Changed Files

- M	README.md
- M	docs/how-to/migrate-from-pytest-operator.md
- M	docs/tutorial/getting-started.md
- M	jubilant/_all_any.py
- M	jubilant/_juju.py
- M	tests/integration/test_execution.py
- M	tests/unit/test_all_any.py

## Diff

```diff
diff --git a/README.md b/README.md
index 03fa7fa..2a8d3a7 100644
--- a/README.md
+++ b/README.md
@@ -29,6 +29,9 @@ import jubilant
 juju = jubilant.Juju()
 juju.deploy('snappass-test')
 juju.wait(jubilant.all_active)
+
+# Or only wait for specific applications:
+juju.wait(lambda status: jubilant.all_active(status, 'snappass-test', 'another-app'))
 ```
 
 Below is an example of a charm integration test. First we define a module-scoped [pytest fixture](https://docs.pytest.org/en/stable/explanation/fixtures.html) named `juju` which creates a temporary model and runs the test with a `Juju` instance pointing at that model. Jubilant's`temp_model` context manager creates the model during test setup and destroys it during teardown:
diff --git a/docs/how-to/migrate-from-pytest-operator.md b/docs/how-to/migrate-from-pytest-operator.md
index 54ced2f..7f93166 100644
--- a/docs/how-to/migrate-from-pytest-operator.md
+++ b/docs/how-to/migrate-from-pytest-operator.md
@@ -81,6 +81,9 @@ In your tests, use the fixture like this:
 def test_active(juju: jubilant.Juju):
     juju.deploy('mycharm')
     juju.wait(jubilant.all_active)
+
+    # Or wait for just 'mycharm' to be active (ignoring other apps):
+    juju.wait(lambda status: jubilant.all_active(status, 'mycharm'))
 ```
 
 A few things to note about the fixture:
@@ -183,7 +186,7 @@ juju.deploy(
     trust=True,
     config={'profile': 'testing'},
 )
-juju.wait(lambda status: status.apps['postgresql-k8s'].is_active)
+juju.wait(lambda status: jubilant.all_active(status, 'postgresql-k8s'))
 ```
 
 ### Fetching status
@@ -225,10 +228,15 @@ def test_active(juju: jubilant.Juju):
     juju.wait(jubilant.all_active, error=jubilant.any_error)
 ```
 
-It's common to use a `lambda` function to customize the callables further. For example, to wait specifically for `mysql` and `redis` to go active:
+It's common to use a `lambda` function to customize the callable or compose multiple checks. For example, to wait specifically for `mysql` and `redis` to go active and `logger` to be blocked:
 
 ```python
-juju.wait(lambda status: jubilant.all_active(status, ['mysql', 'redis']))
+juju.wait(
+    lambda status: (
+        jubilant.all_active(status, 'mysql', 'redis') and
+        jubilant.all_blocked(status, 'logger'),
+    ),
+)
 ```
 
 The `wait` method also has other options (see [`juju.wait`](jubilant.Juju.wait) for details):
@@ -236,7 +244,7 @@ The `wait` method also has other options (see [`juju.wait`](jubilant.Juju.wait)
 ```python
 juju.deploy('mycharm')
 juju.wait(
-    ready=lambda status: status.apps['mycharm'].is_active,
+    ready=lambda status: jubilant.all_active(status, 'mycharm'),
     error=jubilant.any_error,
     delay=0.2,    # poll "juju status" every 200ms (default 1s)
     timeout=60,   # set overall timeout to 60s (default juju.wait_timeout)
diff --git a/docs/tutorial/getting-started.md b/docs/tutorial/getting-started.md
index fdb2863..a4dafde 100644
--- a/docs/tutorial/getting-started.md
+++ b/docs/tutorial/getting-started.md
@@ -76,8 +76,10 @@ Integration tests in a test file would use the fixture, operating on the tempora
 ```python
 def test_deploy(juju: jubilant.Juju):
     juju.deploy('snappass-test')
-    status = juju.wait(jubilant.all_active)
-    assert status.apps['snappass-test'].scale == 1
+    juju.wait(jubilant.all_active)
+
+    # Or wait for just 'snappass-test' to be active (ignoring other apps):
+    juju.wait(lambda status: jubilant.all_active(status, 'snappass-test'))
 ```
 
 You may want to adjust the [scope](https://docs.pytest.org/en/stable/how-to/fixtures.html#fixture-scopes) of your `juju` fixture. For example, to create a new model for every test function (pytest's default behavior), omit the scope:
@@ -93,9 +95,22 @@ def juju():
 
 When waiting on a condition with [`Juju.wait`](jubilant.Juju.wait), you can use pre-defined helpers including [](jubilant.all_active) and [](jubilant.any_error). You can also define custom conditions for the *ready* and *error* parameters. This is typically done with inline `lambda` functions.
 
-For example, to test that the `myapp` charm starts up with application status "unknown":
+For example, to deploy and wait till all the specified applications (`blog`, `mysql`, and `redis`) are "active":
 
+```python
+def test_active_apps(juju: jubilant.Juju):
+    for app in ['blog', 'mysql', 'redis']:
+        juju.deploy(app)
+    juju.integrate('blog', 'mysql')
+    juju.integrate('blog', 'redis')
+    juju.wait(
+        lambda status: jubilant.all_active(status, 'blog', 'mysql', 'redis'),
+    )
 ```
+
+Or to test that the `myapp` charm starts up with application status "unknown":
+
+```python
 def test_unknown(juju: jubilant.Juju):
     juju.deploy('myapp')
     juju.wait(
@@ -103,11 +118,11 @@ def test_unknown(juju: jubilant.Juju):
     )
 ```
 
-There are also `is_*` properties on the [`AppStatus`](jubilant.statustypes.AppStatus) and [`UnitStatus`](jubilant.statustypes.UnitStatus) classes for the common statuses: `is_active`, `is_blocked`, `is_error`, `is_maintenance`, and `is_waiting`.
+There are also `is_*` properties on the [`AppStatus`](jubilant.statustypes.AppStatus) and [`UnitStatus`](jubilant.statustypes.UnitStatus) classes for the common statuses: `is_active`, `is_blocked`, `is_error`, `is_maintenance`, and `is_waiting`. These test the status of a single application or unit, whereas the `jubilant.all_*` and `jubilant.any_*` functions test the statuses of multiple applications *and* all their units.
 
 For example, to wait till `myapp` is active and `yourapp` is blocked, and to raise an error if any app or unit goes into error state:
 
-```
+```python
 def test_custom_wait(juju: jubilant.Juju):
     juju.deploy('myapp')
     juju.deploy('yourapp')
diff --git a/jubilant/_all_any.py b/jubilant/_all_any.py
index e5694a0..60d1a6a 100644
--- a/jubilant/_all_any.py
+++ b/jubilant/_all_any.py
@@ -5,63 +5,81 @@ from collections.abc import Iterable
 from .statustypes import Status
 
 
-def all_active(status: Status, apps: Iterable[str] | None = None) -> bool:
-    """Report whether all applications and units in *status* are in "active" status.
+def all_active(status: Status, *apps: str) -> bool:
+    """Report whether all apps and units in *status* (or in *apps* if provided) are "active".
+
+    Examples::
+
+        # Use the callable directly to wait for all apps in status to be active.
+        juju.wait(jubilant.all_active)
+
+        # Use a lambda to wait for all apps specified (blog, mysql) to be active.
+        juju.wait(lambda status: jubilant.all_active(status, 'blog', 'mysql'))
 
     Args:
         status: The status object being tested.
         apps: An optional list of application names. If provided, only these applications
-            (and their units) are tested.
+            (and their units) are tested, and each must be present in ``status.apps``.
     """
     return _all_statuses_are('active', status, apps)
 
 
-def all_blocked(status: Status, apps: Iterable[str] | None = None) -> bool:
-    """Report whether all applications and units in *status* are in "blocked" status.
+def all_blocked(status: Status, *apps: str) -> bool:
+    """Report whether all apps and units in *status* (or in *apps* if provided) are "blocked".
+
+    See :func:`all_active` for examples.
 
     Args:
         status: The status object being tested.
         apps: An optional list of application names. If provided, only these applications
-            (and their units) are tested.
+            (and their units) are tested, and each must be present in ``status.apps``.
     """
     return _all_statuses_are('blocked', status, apps)
 
 
-def all_error(status: Status, apps: Iterable[str] | None = None) -> bool:
-    """Report whether all applications and units in *status* are in "error" status.
+def all_error(status: Status, *apps: str) -> bool:
+    """Report whether all apps and units in *status* (or in *apps* if provided) are "error".
+
+    See :func:`all_active` for examples.
 
     Args:
         status: The status object being tested.
         apps: An optional list of application names. If provided, only these applications
-            (and their units) are tested.
+            (and their units) are tested, and each must be present in ``status.apps``.
     """
     return _all_statuses_are('error', status, apps)
 
 
-def all_maintenance(status: Status, apps: Iterable[str] | None = None) -> bool:
-    """Report whether all applications and units in *status* are in "maintenance" status.
+def all_maintenance(status: Status, *apps: str) -> bool:
+    """Report whether all apps and units in *status* (or in *apps* if provided) are "maintenance".
+
+    See :func:`all_active` for examples.
 
     Args:
         status: The status object being tested.
         apps: An optional list of application names. If provided, only these applications
-            (and their units) are tested.
+            (and their units) are tested, and each must be present in ``status.apps``.
     """
     return _all_statuses_are('maintenance', status, apps)
 
 
-def all_waiting(status: Status, apps: Iterable[str] | None = None) -> bool:
-    """Report whether all applications and units in *status* are in "waiting" status.
+def all_waiting(status: Status, *apps: str) -> bool:
+    """Report whether all apps and units in *status* (or in *apps* if provided) are "waiting".
+
+    See :func:`all_active` for examples.
 
     Args:
         status: The status object being tested.
         apps: An optional list of application names. If provided, only these applications
-            (and their units) are tested.
+            (and their units) are tested, and each must be present in ``status.apps``.
     """
     return _all_statuses_are('waiting', status, apps)
 
 
-def any_active(status: Status, apps: Iterable[str] | None = None) -> bool:
-    """Report whether any application or unit in *status* is in "active" status.
+def any_active(status: Status,
... [truncated]
```
